README.md, before:

# k_means_clustering_hello_world

A Python implementation of K-means clustering algorithm demonstrated on synthetic people data (age, income). This implementation showcases clustering analysis on demographic data, visualizing how people can be segmented based on their age and income characteristics.

## Overview

The K-means clustering algorithm is an unsupervised learning method that partitions data into k distinct clusters. This implementation:
1. Generates synthetic demographic data
2. Applies K-means clustering to identify natural groupings
3. Visualizes the results with interactive plots
4. Provides a comparison of different cluster counts (k=2 to k=5)

## Features

- **Data Generation**: Creates synthetic demographic data with customizable parameters
  - Age range: 18-70 years
  - Income range: $20,000-$120,000
  - Configurable sample size (default: 100,000 samples)

- **Clustering Analysis**: 
  - Implementation of K-means clustering from scratch
  - Configurable number of clusters (k=2 to k=5 comparison)
  - Euclidean distance-based clustering
  - Iterative convergence with centroid updates

- **Visualization**:
  - Multi-plot comparison of different k values
  - Scatter plots with distinct colors for each cluster
  - Cluster centers marked with black X markers
  - Clear labeling of axes and clusters

## Structure

```
k_means_clustering_hello_world/
├── src/
│   ├── main.py         # Entry point, calls main() from cli.py
│   ├── cli.py          # CLI argument parsing and workflow logic
│   ├── data.py         # Data generation and filtering
│   ├── clustering.py   # K-means and distance logic
│   └── plotting.py     # 2D/3D plotting functions
├── tests/
│   └── test_main.py
├── requirements.txt
├── .gitignore
└── README.md
```

**src/data.py**: Data generation and filtering functions

**src/clustering.py**: K-means and distance calculation

**src/plotting.py**: 2D/3D plotting (Matplotlib, Plotly)

**src/cli.py**: CLI argument parsing, workflow, and main logic

**src/main.py**: Thin entry point, just calls `main()` from `cli.py`

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.x
- pip (Python package installer)
- Virtual environment (recommended)

### Setup

1. Clone the repository:
```sh
git clone https://github.com/bhuwanchopra/k_means_clustering_hello_world.git
cd k_means_clustering_hello_world
```

2. Create and activate a virtual environment (recommended):
```sh
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Unix/macOS
# OR
.venv\Scripts\activate  # On Windows
```

3. Install the required packages:
```sh
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Run


## Usage


## Usage


Run the main script to visualize customer segments in a 3D interactive plot:

```sh
python src/main.py
```

You can also specify the number of people to generate (default: 100000):

```sh
python src/main.py --num_samples 50000
```


### CLI Options

- `--num_samples`: Number of people to generate (default: 100000)

#### Young Professionals Segment
- `--young_age_min`: Minimum age (default: 25)
- `--young_age_max`: Maximum age (default: 35)
- `--young_income_min`: Minimum income (default: 90000)
- `--young_freq_min`: Minimum purchase frequency (default: 50)

#### Budget Conscious Segment
- `--budget_income_max`: Maximum income (default: 40000)
- `--budget_freq_min`: Minimum purchase frequency (default: 30)

#### Loyal Customers Segment
- `--loyal_freq_min`: Minimum purchase frequency (default: 80)
- `--loyal_purchase_min`: Minimum purchase history (default: 20000)

The 3D plot uses Plotly for advanced interactivity. The three segments are:
- **Young Professionals**: Age between `--young_age_min` and `--young_age_max`, Income >= `--young_income_min`, Frequency >= `--young_freq_min`
- **Budget Conscious**: Income <= `--budget_income_max`, Frequency >= `--budget_freq_min`
- **Loyal Customers**: Frequency >= `--loyal_freq_min`, Purchase History >= `--loyal_purchase_min`

### Test

Run the test suite to verify the implementation:
```sh
# From the root directory of the project:
python -m pytest tests/test_main.py -v
```

If you encounter import errors, try one of these solutions:

1. Using PYTHONPATH:
```sh
PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:. python -m pytest tests/test_main.py -v  # On Unix/macOS
# OR
set PYTHONPATH=%PYTHONPATH%;. && python -m pytest tests/test_main.py -v  # On Windows
```

2. Or install the package in development mode:
```sh
pip install -e .
```

The test suite covers:
- Data generation functionality
- Euclidean distance calculations
- K-means clustering algorithm
- Cluster assignment and convergence
- Edge cases and reproducibility

## Implementation Details

### Data Generation
- Age range: 18-70 years (uniformly distributed)
- Income range: $20,000-$120,000 (uniformly distributed)
- Default sample size: 100,000 points

### K-means Algorithm
1. Random initialization of k cluster centers
2. Iterative process:
   - Assign each point to nearest center
   - Update centers to mean of assigned points
   - Check for convergence
3. Returns cluster labels and final centers

### Visualization
- Scatter plots with different colors per cluster
- Black X markers for cluster centers
- Age on x-axis, Income on y-axis
- Comprehensive legend and labels

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Adding CoPilot acknowledgement to README.md

README.md, after:

# k_means_clustering_hello_world

A Python implementation of K-means clustering algorithm demonstrated on synthetic people data (age, income). This implementation showcases clustering analysis on demographic data, visualizing how people can be segmented based on their age and income characteristics.

## Overview

The K-means clustering algorithm is an unsupervised learning method that partitions data into k distinct clusters. This implementation:
1. Generates synthetic demographic data
2. Applies K-means clustering to identify natural groupings
3. Visualizes the results with interactive plots
4. Provides a comparison of different cluster counts (k=2 to k=5)

## Features

- **Data Generation**: Creates synthetic demographic data with customizable parameters
  - Age range: 18-70 years
  - Income range: $20,000-$120,000
  - Configurable sample size (default: 100,000 samples)

- **Clustering Analysis**: 
  - Implementation of K-means clustering from scratch
  - Configurable number of clusters (k=2 to k=5 comparison)
  - Euclidean distance-based clustering
  - Iterative convergence with centroid updates

- **Visualization**:
  - Multi-plot comparison of different k values
  - Scatter plots with distinct colors for each cluster
  - Cluster centers marked with black X markers
  - Clear labeling of axes and clusters

## Structure

```
k_means_clustering_hello_world/
├── src/
│   ├── main.py         # Entry point, calls main() from cli.py
│   ├── cli.py          # CLI argument parsing and workflow logic
│   ├── data.py         # Data generation and filtering
│   ├── clustering.py   # K-means and distance logic
│   └── plotting.py     # 2D/3D plotting functions
├── tests/
│   └── test_main.py
├── requirements.txt
├── .gitignore
└── README.md
```

**src/data.py**: Data generation and filtering functions

**src/clustering.py**: K-means and distance calculation

**src/plotting.py**: 2D/3D plotting (Matplotlib, Plotly)

**src/cli.py**: CLI argument parsing, workflow, and main logic

**src/main.py**: Thin entry point, just calls `main()` from `cli.py`

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.x
- pip (Python package installer)
- Virtual environment (recommended)

### Setup

1. Clone the repository:
```sh
git clone https://github.com/bhuwanchopra/k_means_clustering_hello_world.git
cd k_means_clustering_hello_world
```

2. Create and activate a virtual environment (recommended):
```sh
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Unix/macOS
# OR
.venv\Scripts\activate  # On Windows
```

3. Install the required packages:
```sh
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Run


## Usage


## Usage


Run the main script to visualize customer segments in a 3D interactive plot:

```sh
python src/main.py
```

You can also specify the number of people to generate (default: 100000):

```sh
python src/main.py --num_samples 50000
```


### CLI Options

- `--num_samples`: Number of people to generate (default: 100000)

#### Young Professionals Segment
- `--young_age_min`: Minimum age (default: 25)
- `--young_age_max`: Maximum age (default: 35)
- `--young_income_min`: Minimum income (default: 90000)
- `--young_freq_min`: Minimum purchase frequency (default: 50)

#### Budget Conscious Segment
- `--budget_income_max`: Maximum income (default: 40000)
- `--budget_freq_min`: Minimum purchase frequency (default: 30)

#### Loyal Customers Segment
- `--loyal_freq_min`: Minimum purchase frequency (default: 80)
- `--loyal_purchase_min`: Minimum purchase history (default: 20000)

The 3D plot uses Plotly for advanced interactivity. The three segments are:
- **Young Professionals**: Age between `--young_age_min` and `--young_age_max`, Income >= `--young_income_min`, Frequency >= `--young_freq_min`
- **Budget Conscious**: Income <= `--budget_income_max`, Frequency >= `--budget_freq_min`
- **Loyal Customers**: Frequency >= `--loyal_freq_min`, Purchase History >= `--loyal_purchase_min`

### Test

Run the test suite to verify the implementation:
```sh
# From the root directory of the project:
python -m pytest tests/test_main.py -v
```

If you encounter import errors, try one of these solutions:

1. Using PYTHONPATH:
```sh
PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:. python -m pytest tests/test_main.py -v  # On Unix/macOS
# OR
set PYTHONPATH=%PYTHONPATH%;. && python -m pytest tests/test_main.py -v  # On Windows
```

2. Or install the package in development mode:
```sh
pip install -e .
```

The test suite covers:
- Data generation functionality
- Euclidean distance calculations
- K-means clustering algorithm
- Cluster assignment and convergence
- Edge cases and reproducibility

## Implementation Details

### Data Generation
- Age range: 18-70 years (uniformly distributed)
- Income range: $20,000-$120,000 (uniformly distributed)
- Default sample size: 100,000 points

### K-means Algorithm
1. Random initialization of k cluster centers
2. Iterative process:
   - Assign each point to nearest center
   - Update centers to mean of assigned points
   - Check for convergence
3. Returns cluster labels and final centers

### Visualization
- Scatter plots with different colors per cluster
- Black X markers for cluster centers
- Age on x-axis, Income on y-axis
- Comprehensive legend and labels

## Acknowledgement

This code was generated with the assistance of GitHub Copilot.

## License

MIT
